# College Retrospective

### 5/26/25

College is unlike high school in the sense that college should be viewed as an _investment_ into your future. This is contrasted to high school where we're state mandated to attend. While this sentiment should be obvious given the **hundreds of thousands** of dollars people spend on college, this wasn't something I realized until this year. <br><br>
Those who know me know that I'm not a very good student. I had horrendous grades in middle school and horrendous attendance in high school. Despite that I was never behind in class. I always enjoyed studying and learning, but I was never interested in going to class, listening, or doing homework. I loved to take tests and I loved competition and truthfully that's what really drove me. The same bad habits persisted in college. I wouldn't go to class and I wouldn't do homework. I never did poorly on exams because when push came to shove, I was always able to learn the content. I mention this because now that I am not longer a student, I can reflect back at this mentality that I had.
<br><br>

## Skipping out on math

There's plenty that I regret. Looking back, however, I don't regret my bad student tendencies. For those who are unaware, I am currently a software engineer at Uncountable. Something that I didn't realize I was going to do a year ago. Going back to last year I was sure that I wanted to go into academia. I had always liked math and more importantly I had always envisioned myself getting a PhD. The impetus of this primarily stemmed from my love of learning. Math is a limitless subject that gets more interesting the deeper you go. On the other hand, I don't regret having quit that career path.
<br><br>
Everything is viewed in rose tinted glasses when you don't know the other perspective. Research and teaching were, sure, things that I enjoyed. But the path up the mountain didn't seem to reap the potential rewards. I say this because even if I had attempted to scale the challenge, it was never guaranteed for me to have succeeded. Let's talk about the few reasons as to what contributed to me quitting:

## 1. People are Too Smart

People progress through math differently, but one of the common denominators is that **everyone** hits a road block at some point. For some people this might be Algebra I, for a lot of people this is Calculus. For me, this was _Abstract Algebra 2_ or Math 542 at UW-Madison. This class was taught by Paul Apisa, a notorious professor at UW known for being a great lecturer, but impossibly difficult homeworks and exams. People often ask what the point of taking such a class is. It just sounds like being a masochist, but like what my roommate always says, enjoying math is masochistic in it of itself. Classes like these are ideal for becoming a research mathematician. The homeworks were sort of expositions into adjacent topics that applied the basic concepts you learned in class. Essentially an abridged version of how you might've discovered the underlying math yourself. I had gotten **COVID** during week 4, which was when we were covering _tensor products_. Tensor products are already an abstract idea that truthfully I still don't have a good grasp on. Missing an entire week was not ideal and when I came back I realized I had no clue what was going on in class anymore.
<br><br>
I spent countless hours reading the textbook, reviewing notes, watching online lectures, but none of it stuck. Not only did none of it stick, the class, and my other classes continued to progress leaving me in the dust. The first midterm comes around and I scored below the third quartile. This was the worst I've done on an exam relative to the class. I had known that I did poorly on the exam, just because in math it's so easy to self report your understanding of the content. However, when I found out at the Halloween party that I was out, I still felt heartbroken. Such a common trope in undergraduate is that one class doesn't matter and everyone struggles. I quite honestly strongly disagree with this sentiment. How can I tell myself I can be a mathematician if I was struggling so much in an undergraduate class in a mid tier university. Sure the class was difficult and I had set backs, but it was eye opening in the sense that I could no longer coast my way through good grades. I did end up locking in and scored above average on the final, and given that there's selection bias given that everyone had dropped out that couldn't handle the heat, I still realized that this was a bad sign for my math aptitude.
<br><br>
Ideally, this is part of the story where I told you that I used this as motivation to continue going and I end up becoming a world renowned mathematician. However, as I mentioned. I am now a software engineer. The semester after that I had a long look in the mirror and part of me realized I would never be a good mathematician, and if I were to be a mathematician, it would just be at a terrible university anyways.
<br>

## 2. Research Bureaucracy

My junior year summer I did an REU at UW-Madison on _Latent Network Learning_. It started off fun as the topic at hand was relatively interesting. I enjoyed this cross section of machine learning and math, these methods of machine learning weren't mystical as most people believe them to be, but actual useful tools in analyzing large scale datasets. Essentially the project consisted of using _dictionary learning_ to analyze various networks to create network motifs. We would then use these network motifs to reconstruct other networks and subsequently compare network similarties based on learned traits. In an abstract sense you can think of this as finding subbasis vectors and seeing how much of another subspace they span.
<br><br>
But it wasn't really the research that caused me issues. The real issue that I had was how poorly the program was ran. My experience at my previous research experience in Indiana University was wonderful. Everything was ran very well and we were treated very well. **THIS WAS NOT THE NORM**. It had most certainly been on the top end of the curve while the one in Madison was near the bottom end of the curve. There were a bunch of small issues with the program, but the main issue was the payment.
<br><br>
Research internships aren't meant to be considered a j\*b. Afterall, the money you make isn't even taxed since it's considered a stipend. But at the same time, many of these programs stipulate that you are not allowed to work a job concurrently. The program paid around $4,000 over 10 weeks, which is reasonable to live off of as a college student. However, what ended up happening was we never got paid. The first two weeks had gone by and I contacted the professors regarding payment as I wanted to get some more cash to pay for living expenses. I was told that money would be coming shortly. Two more weeks go by and again I follow up asking for an update, and again I'm told that I would be paid on the pay cycle. Again, two more weeks go by and we're halfway through the project while a single cent hasn't touched my checkings. Of course I was fine. I had money at the time and I wasn't super concerned about not having enough money, but there was a distinct lack of urgency and a feeling of disrespect. There was no contract signed saying that I would receive any money, it was just in good faith. And after spending 6-8 hours a day working on a reserach project, I felt I deserved something in return.
<br><br>
Around the 8 week mark of the program I hit a massive down swing in my poker career. This included several large losses and an accidental Venmo of $2,000. I had enough money in my poker budget to cover all of this, but since we weren't getting paid for the research position, I had to transfer money from my poker account to my everyday account. In the month of August I had probably burned through around 8k from poker losses and general living expenses for the past 3 months. This was no longer feasible. I started getting upset at the professor and HR, neither of which gave me a good reason as to why payment was delayed and when I would get paid. It wasn't until three days before the program had concluded had I finally got a check expedited.
<br><br>
This whole experience left a very sour taste in my mouth. The pay was already not good to start with along with horrendous amenities. There was no incentive to want to pursue academia. These summer programs are meant to shed a light on academia and preparing students for PhDs. All it had done was actively disuade me from pursuing a PhD. If the university cared this little about paying for research, why should I provide such a service to the university. Even beyond just the disrespect, I don't want to have to grovel at the feet of HR just to get my tiny stipend. My work should be paid for adequately and timely. Am I being a brat? I don't think so, I think these are just terms that should be agreed upon.

## Final Thoughts

When asking professors if you should pursue academia, the majority of them will actively disaude you. I obviously jumped ship very early on, so I can't necessarily speak to what the circumstances are really like. I am only able to speak on it as if I am observing it from behind glass. That being said, it fucking sucks. I should preface this next part saying that my understanding is primarily for math and not PhDs in general.
<br><br>
You get paid around 35k a year while working more than 40 hours a week. You get no retirement benefits and no guaranteed job prospects. The degree itself doesn't make you substantially more marketable and all you really got out of it is a doctor title and more fancy math tricks in your toolbox. The fact that a program takes 5 years to complete meaning you make around 175k with no 401k match, HSA contribution, or money left to put in a Roth is appalling. This can be compared to a software engineering job where you get paid 120k annually, which means in 5 years you make 600k, an extra 18k from 401k match, maxed HSA, and maxed Roth IRA. In addition, you have lots more money to help build credit, earn miles, and set yourself up to be financially successful moving forward.
<br><br>
I'm not saying that getting a PhD is a bad choice. But I strongly believe that getting a PhD in math is antithetical to the idea that college is an investment into your future.
